HAL Id: hal-03922093
https://hal.science/hal-03922093
Preprint submitted on 4 Jan 2023
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not.
The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
Environmental assessment of projects involving AI
methods
Laurent Lefèvre, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Denis Trystram, Sylvain Bouveret,
Aurélie Bugeau, Jacques Combaz, Emmanuelle Frenoux, Gaël Guennebaud,
Julien Lefèvre, Jean-Philippe Nicolaï, et al.
To cite this version:
Laurent Lefèvre, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Denis Trystram, Sylvain Bouveret, Aurélie Bugeau, et al..
Environmental assessment of projects involving AI methods. 2023. ￿hal-03922093￿
Proposal for a framework document
Environmental assessment
of projects involving AI methods
Coordination for EcoInfo: Laurent Lefèvre (LIP, INRIA, CNRS), Anne-Laure Ligozat
(Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, ENSIIE, LISN), Denis Trystram (Université Grenoble Alpes,
Grenoble INP, CNRS, Inria)
Contributions: Sylvain Bouveret (Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LIG), Aurélie
Bugeau (Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, Bordeaux INP, LaBRI), Jacques Combaz (Univ. Grenoble
Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, VERIMAG), Emmanuelle Frenoux (Université Paris-Saclay,
CNRS, Polytech Paris-Saclay, LISN), Gaël Guennebaud (Inria Bordeaux), Julien Lefèvre
(Aix Marseille Univ., CNRS, INT, Inst Neurosci Timone), Jean-Philippe Nicolai (GAEL,
Grenoble INP)
Translation to English: Karin Dassas and Anne-Laure Ligozat, rewritten from DeepL
Contact: anne-laure.ligozat@lisn.upsaclay.fr
Version: 15 March 2022
Introduction
The objective of this document is to provide criteria for assessing the environmental impacts
of responses to calls for projects involving Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods. When
proposing these criteria, we take into account, in addition to the general impacts of digital
services, the specificities of the AI field and in particular of machine learning: impacts of the
learning and inference phases, data collection...
This document is organized in two parts. The first part contains the list of questions
proposed for respondents to the calls for proposals. In order to allow respondents to answer
these questions in the most relevant way possible, and to allow evaluators to judge the
relevance of these answers as well as possible and take them into account in their decision,
we have written an explanatory note in the second part to accompany the questions asked to
respondents.
This document was written in response to an explicit request from the Ministry of Ecological
Transition to the EcoInfo collective.
1.
Questions for respondents
1
In the following, we will refer to a proposal as a response to the call for proposals. We will try
to evaluate the environmental impacts of the digital part of this proposal, which we will call
service. We will focus on the impact of artificial intelligence methods.
In the following, respondents can answer N/A if a criterion is not eligible for their proposal.
Impacts of digital equipment in the proposal
In this section, we want to take into account the digital equipment used during the design of
the service and during its use, both by the respondent, the service provider and the users of
the service.
Embodied energy and end of life of digital equipment
Make an inventory of the digital equipment used to implement the proposal, taking into
account the phases indicated in the scoping document. In the "End of Life Code" column,
indicate, according to the code in the second table below, how the digital equipment used in
the creation and then in the deployment of the proposal will be managed and, more
specifically, what will happen at the end of life of the equipment.
Embodied energy
Type of digital
equipment
Number of
equipments
Estimated
period of use
(years)
Manufacturing
GHG footprint
according to
Ecodiag
(purchase/flow
version,
kgCO2e)
End of Life
Code (see
following table)
End of
Life
Code
1
2
3
4
5
6
Reuse within
the company
Resale for
reuse
Resale for
recycling
Approved
recycling
channel
(specify)
Donation
for reuse
(specify)
Other
(specify)
2
Energy in use phase
Consider the different phases of proposal creation and deployment, as indicated in the
scoping document: data acquisition, processing, transport and storage, model learning and
inference (testing and deployment)
Characterization of the proposal
Is there a forecast on the number of instances of the service sold?
What is the expected growth of this number?
These figures are to be taken into account in the rest of the document.
Take into account the different phases of creation and deployment of the proposal
Type of algorithm. If it is a Deep learning
algorithm, specify the expected architecture
(example: CNN, Transformer...)
Number of model parameters (order of
magnitude)
Number of trainings expected over the life of
the service (a range can be given)
Expected number of runs of the trained
model when testing and using the service (a
range can be specified)
Source of data used to create and deploy the
model
Type of data processing (cleaning, database
management...) or data augmentation
algorithm
Possible data made available (specify which)
Computation
Estimated
number of
hours
Type of equipment/
infrastructure (specify
cloud provider if
applicable)
PUE of the
infrastructure if
relevant and known
Location of the
equipment or
infrastructure
Footprint
according
to Green
Algorithms1
(kgCO2e)
3
CPU
GPU or
equivalent
Data
Data
type
Quantity of
data stored
(if creation
of a data
stream,
indicate
e.g.
expected
quantity /
year)
Storage
duration
Type of
equipment/
infrastructure
(specify cloud
provider if
applicable)
PUE of the
infrastructure
if relevant
and known
Location of
the
equipment or
infrastructure
Amount of
data
transferre
d / year
Rationale for the proposed method
Are the AI methods well adapted to the considered context? What are the expected societal
and technological benefits (performance, quality of service, etc.) and environmental impacts
compared to other methods?
What is the environmental resilience of the service, for example in the event of a network
outage or a disruption in material or energy supply?
Environmental impacts related to behavioral, economic, or
societal changes induced by the proposal
This section should only be completed for AI services that have environmental benefits
as an objective. These benefits often do not take into account the behavioral, economic, or
societal changes induced by the proposal and having environmental consequences.
Specify the reference scenario
The notions of environmental benefits but also of negative environmental impacts are based
on the idea of a comparison between two situations: a reference scenario that does not
involve AI and a scenario in which AI is deployed. Briefly specify these scenarios.
4
Reference scenario
Scénario involving IA
Identifying potential impacts
Below is a qualitative list of potential effects that can be expected from the proposal:
obsolescence effects, direct or indirect rebound effects, societal transformations, etc. Here
the term "potential effects" of the proposal is to be taken in a broad sense: they can be
induced by the proposal itself or be related to the technology(ies) in which it is embedded.
Potential impacts
Nature of the
effect
Short description of the effect
Types of
environmental impact
Prevention of potential impacts
For each impact listed above, specify what, if any, countermeasures are planned to mitigate
or reverse the impact and indicate the effectiveness that can be expected from the
countermeasure. The term countermeasure is used when the impact is directly affected.
Thus, any environmental compensation mechanism is not considered a countermeasure.
Countermeasures
Impact
Countermeasure
Expected efficiency
5
2. Explanatory note
Impacts of digital equipment in the proposal
The impacts of the digital equipment in the proposal are due to the life cycle of all the
equipment needed to create and deploy the proposed project: raw material extraction,
manufacturing, transportation and end of life on the one hand (embodied energy), and use
on the other hand.
In the case of a proposal involving Artificial Intelligence methods, the respondents can also
distinguish the impacts due to the different phases of creation and deployment of the
proposed project: acquisition, processing, transport and storage of data, learning of the
model and inferences (test and deployment).
The respondents will take into account the calculations and storage that are done on internal
equipment or at the customer's site (known hardware), and those that are done on remote
equipment, especially the cloud.
The "Embodied Energy" table aims at estimating the impact of raw material extraction,
manufacturing, transportation and end of life of all the digital equipment needed for the
proposal.
The "Characterization of the proposal" part provides an understanding of the type of service
that will be implemented and aims to get an idea of the evolution scenarios of the proposed
service. The questions about the expected number of instances of the service sold and the
expected growth aim at estimating the sufficiency of a service, which is not only based on
the efficiency of a single instance but on the product of the unit efficiency by the global
usage.
The "Computation" table aims at estimating the impact that the associated calculations will
have, both in the service creation phase (from data acquisition to model testing) and in the
deployment phase (eventual learning and inference in the service implemented internally
and at the clients'). Schematically, the carbon footprint related to the consumption of
dynamic energy for training and inference of a model can be calculated as follows:
●
with Etotal the dynamic energy consumption from
𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 =  𝑃𝑈𝐸 𝑥 Σ 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒
computation, PUE (power usage effectiveness) a metric of energy efficiency of the
infrastructure when using a data center1, and Eressource the energy consumption of
a resource for the process considered, the resources taken into account being
generally the following: CPUs, GPUs et DRAM
●
then
with CO2eq the carbon footprint and CI the carbon
𝐶𝑂2𝑒𝑞 =  𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑥 𝐶𝐼
intensity of the electricity, which enables to convert electricity consumption into the
corresponding greenhouse gas emissions, and therefore depends on the energy mix
of the location where the computations are made and the period in which the
program is launched
1 Generally, the PUE is averaged over a year
6
The "Data" table aims to determine the carbon footprint related to the storage and transport
of the data needed to create and deploy the service.
The "Rationale for the proposed method" section aims to estimate the necessity of the
proposed service and to judge the cost/benefit ratio in environmental terms. For example, in
the field of deep learning, some works have questioned the very limited performance gains
with respect to the computation time and energy deployed for this. You can rely on a short
bibliography (5 references maximum) to briefly describe the proposed method in comparison
with previous or similar methods.
The question on resilience aims at understanding the capacities of the service to operate in
a degraded hardware context (network cuts, power cuts, hardware downgrading).
Environmental impacts related to behavioral, economic, or
societal changes induced by the proposal
Some proposals may advance environmental benefits. For example, it is generally
considered that intelligent buildings will reduce energy consumption. Most of the time, these
environmental benefits are estimated by making the simplifying assumption that the
AI-based service only replaces or optimizes a reference service, and that it has no other
effect on habits, behaviors, economic balances, or societal dynamics. This section aims to
study the effects related to behavioral, economic, or societal changes induced by the
proposal, in particular those that claim environmental benefits.
The "Potential impacts" table is intended to list potential effects related to the proposal. As
these effects are much more difficult to quantify than those due to the life cycle of the
equipment, the objective here is not to make an overall environmental assessment (which
would require exhaustive quantification), but rather to qualitatively point out the potential
effects. Here the term "potential impacts" of the proposal is to be taken in a broad sense:
they can be induced by the proposal itself or be related to the technology or technologies in
which it is embedded. Let's take the example of the autonomous vehicle, which uses AI
massively to ensure its operation. A "platooning" service can, among other things, reduce
the consumption per kilometer of vehicles. The potential impacts concern the platooning
service itself, but also those of the autonomous vehicle insofar as platooning requires
autonomy. Examples of potential effects of platooning and autonomous vehicles are given
below.
Examples of potential impacts
Nature of the
effect
Description of the effect
Types of
environmental
impacts
Obsolescence
accelerated renewal of the vehicle fleet due to the
very rapid evolution of the performance of
autonomous modes from one vehicle generation
to the next
related to the
manufacture of
vehicles: climate
change, resource
depletion...
Direct rebound
increase of the distances traveled due to the
climate change
7
decrease of the costs of use ("platooning"), the
valorization of the travel time (thanks to the
activities carried out during the travel: work, rest,
leisure...), the greater accessibility (children, old
people, and even objects will have access to the
car), the self-parking...
(increase in
greenhouse gas
emissions)
Indirect rebound
the economic gains due to "platooning" are
re-spent by users on products or services with a
high environmental impact (air travel...)
function of the
products/services
Societal
changes
mobility leads to changes in travel habits, urban
sprawl
climate change
(greenhouse gas
emissions), loss of
biodiversity due to
artificialization and
sprawl
8
